# 9 The Ninth Stage

And I slept and dreamed again, and saw the same two pilgrims going down the mountains along the highway towards the city. Now, a little below these mountains, on the left hand, lieth the country of Conceit, from which country there comes into the way in which the pilgrims walked a little crooked lane. Here, therefore, they met with a very brisk lad that came out of that country, and his name was Ignorance. So Christian asked him from what parts he came, and whither he was going.

IGNOR. Sir, I was born in the country that lieth off there, a little on the left hand, and I am going to the Celestial City.

CHR. But how do you think to get in at the gate, for you may find some difficulty there?

IGNOR. As other good people do, said he.

CHR. But what have you to show at that gate, that the gate should be opened to you?

IGNOR. I know my Lord's will, and have been a good liver; I pay every man his own; I pray, fast, support the church, and give alms, and have left my country for whither I am going.

CHR. But thou earnest not in at the wicket-gate, that is, at the head of this way; thou earnest in hither through that same crooked lane, and therefore I fear, however thou mayest think of thyself, when the reckoning-day shall come, thou wilt have laid to thy charge, that thou art a thief and a robber, instead of getting admittance into the city.

IGNOR. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers to me; I know you not; be content to follow the religion of your country, and I will follow the religion of mine. I hope all will be well. And as for the gate that you talk of, all the world knows that it is a great way off of our country. I cannot think that any man in all our parts doth so much as know the way to it; nor need they mind whether they do or no, since we have, as you see, a fine, pleasant, green lane, that comes clown from our country, the next way into the way.

When Christian saw that the man was wise in his own conceit, he said to Hopeful, whisperingly, "There is more hope of a fool than of him." And said, moreover, "When he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool." What, shall we talk further with him, or outgo him at present, and so leave him to think of what he hath heard already, and then stop again for him afterwards, and see if by degrees we can do any good by him?

So they both went on, and Ignorance came after. Now, when they had passed him a little way, they entered into a very dark lane, where they met a man whom seven evil spirits had bound with seven strong cords, and were carrying him back to the door that they saw on the side of the hill. Now good Christian began to tremble, and so did Hopeful, his companion; yet, as the evil spirits led away the man, Christian looked to see if he knew him; and he thought it might be one Turnaway, that dwelt in the town of Apostasy. But he did not perfectly see his face, for he did hang his head like a thief that is found out.

Then said Christian to his fellow, Now I call to my remembrance that which was told me of a thing that happened to a good man hereabout. The name of the man was Littlefaith; but a good man, and he dwelt in the town of Sincere. The thing was this. At the entering in at this passage, there comes down from Broadway-gate a lane, called Deadman's lane; so called because of the murders that are commonly done there; and this Littlefaith going on a pilgrimage, as we do now, chanced to sit down there and sleep. Now there happened at that time to come down the lane from Broadway-gate, three sturdy rogues, and their names were Faintheart, Mistrust, and Guilt, three brothers; and they, espying Littlefaith where he was, came galloping up with speed. Now, the good man was just awakened from his sleep, and was getting up to go on his journey. So they all came up to him, and with threatening language bid him stand. At this, Littlefaith looked as white as a sheet, and had neither power to fight nor fly. Then said Faintheart, Deliver thy purse; but he making no haste to do it (for he was loth to lose his money), Mistrust ran up to him, and thrusting his hand into his pocket, pulled out thence a bag of silver. Then he cried out, Thieves, thieves! With that Guilt, with a great club that was in his hand, struck Littlefaith on the head, and with that blow felled him flat to the ground, where he lay bleeding as one that would bleed to death. All this while the thieves stood by. But, at last, they hearing that some were upon the road, and fearing lest it should be one Greatgrace, that dwells in the town of Good-Confidence, they betook themselves to their heels, and left this good man to shift for himself. Now, after a while, Littlefaith came to himself, and getting up, made shift to scramble on his way. This was the story.